um well thank you very much um it's a
pleasure to be here and i'd like to
thank emma and helen and the other
organizers for the
kind of invitation
and i'm honored to be here and have the
opportunity to tell you a little bit
about
the way we view cancer
and the approaches that we think could
potentially make a real difference in
the lives of people
um so i'm going to give you an overview
of of what i think
cancer is um and uh
then we'll talk a little bit more about
calorie restriction ketogenic diets and
some new approaches that i think will be
effective uh in potentially
uh bringing or reigning in the
aggression of this of this
disease so um basically uh
the disease was uh fundamentally
described by otto warburg
uh through his uh lifelong research in
germany
and uh basically uh
what the warburg theory is is that uh
cancers arise from damage to cellular
respiration
and if energy through fermentation
gradually compensates for the
insufficient respiration
respiratory damage eventually becomes
irreversible
and cancer cells continue to ferment
lactate in the presence of oxygen which
has been referred to as aerobic
glycolysis or aerobic fermentation of
these different kinds of terms
and this has now been recognized as the
warburg effect
um and there's a great uh research
emphasis into trying to figure out uh
what is responsible for the warburg
effect and actually warburg himself
described it is damage to the
respiration and more and more
papers are coming into the literature
saying exactly that
so just briefly going over the um most
simplistic of energy metabolism you
heard a lot about that today in more
detail um you know basically most of our
energy comes through oxidative
phosphorylation about 90 percent smaller
amounts of energy are generated through
a process called substrate level
phosphorylation in the cytoplasm and
also in the tca cycle through the
succinyl coa synthase
now what happens in cancer
is that there is an insufficiency of
respiration from any variety of things
and i'll discuss how this happens but in
order for the cell to remain functional
and alive the cell has to get energy
from alternative sources so fermentation
processes uh can compensate for the
deficiency in respiration and this
fermentation happens through the
endonemic pathway in the cytoplasm using
glucose as a fuel or can actually be
glutamine can be fermented in the in the
mitochondria uh through amino acid
fermentation especially under hypoxic
conditions so you can get anaplerotic
effects of glutamine and energy effects
of glutamine
under certain kinds of conditions
so um as morberg said cancer is a
disease of respiration so if you're
going to look at uh respiration you need
to look at the mitochondria and we saw
this diagram the other day it's kind of
a generic uh uh this is the bean shape
orthodox model of the mitochondrion
electron micrograph these stripes here
that you can see these are the cristae
they're the elaborations of the inner
membrane of the mitochondria and they
contain the proteins of the electron
transport chain that we heard about
today and they're held in position by a
very interesting phospholipid called
cardiolipin and cardiolipin actually
controls the function of the proteins in
the in the electron transport chain
now here's a mitochondrion of
glioblastoma multiforming and you can
see crystallisis so the very structures
that are needed to generate energy
through respiration are themselves
missing
and pete peterson at johns hopkins had
done a remarkable review showing that
all the different kinds of defects that
you could find in cancer mitochondria
there are defects in the numbers the
structure the function there's no known
tumor cell that has a completely
functional respiration
especially if you look at all the
different ways you can measure
respiration
now knowing that
uh we over the last several years
redefined cancer as a mitochondrial
metabolic disease a type of
mitochondrial metabolic disease and we
addressed many of the outstanding issues
associated with the disease linking all
of the so-called cancer hallmarks of
hanahan and weinberg into the con
conception of a mitochondrial defect
so this is the oncogenic paradox which
is how is it possible that so many
different things in the environment can
cause cancer through a common mechanism
and if we look at those various things
we have carcinogens everybody knows this
radiation hypoxia inflammation rare
inherited mutations like the bracha one
the p53 there's a variety of others
brass oncogenes viruses and age just
getting older puts you at a higher risk
for cancer
now orberg said there are many secondary
causes of cancer but there is only one
primary cause and that's insufficiency
of respiration and every one of these
things including the inherited mutations
damage the respiration in some way
leading to a dysfunction so oxidative
phosphorylation begins to fall off
whereas substrate level phosphorylation
in the fermi form fermentation process
is compensates now how does this happen
the mitochondria signal the nucleus in a
very interesting extra nuclear
epigenetic way
for the nucleus to turn on those genes
that are going to allow the up
regulation of the pathways involved in
fermentation
those genes happen to be oncogenes so
the oncogenes are simply uh
responding to the uh abnormal energy
metabolism that you have and you get
this upregular transcription factors but
what happens is that you have this
progressed state where the the situation
doesn't change either in the cells and
like the micro environment is also
participatory in this continual
escalation of problems now what happens
is that the radicals are produced in the
mitochondria
destabilize the nuclear genome so we get
multiple numbers of point mutations
different chromosomal abnormalities all
of the things that we hear about in
cancer are secondary downstream effects
of damage to respiration and i'll have
evidence i'll show you what i mean now
the warburg effect is simply the
compensatory now what happens here is
the cells once they the respiration is
defective they enter into their default
state which is which is unbridled
proliferation all of the cells all of
the organisms that existed on the planet
before oxygen came into the environment
were proliferate they were fermenters
and they had unbridled proliferation so
what we're seeing is simply the
hallmarks are the consequence of
destabilized respiration and the return
to the default state which is unbridled
proliferation you know sustained
angiogenesis is is is linked to the
oncogenes and the and the hyph1 alpha
which has to be on uh the mitochondria
play a very powerful role in regulating
cell death but if they're dysfunctional
that they escape the apototic mechanism
and they go on to survive and i'm not
going to have time to talk about what
the really key issue here which is
metastasis which involves a fusion of
myeloid cells with neoplastic stem cells
and you can get this highly metastatic
situation so what i essentially said to
you
is that the disease is a mitochondrial
metabolic disease with with a lot of uh
things in addition to that but what
about the nuclear genome all right so
what happens is if you take the nucleus
out of the tumor cell and put it into a
cell that has normal mitochondria all of
the tumor genes are suppressed and the
tumor the cells do not become tumor
genic right you can get beautiful
regulated growth you can clone a mouse
from a nucleus of a tumor cell frogs you
can do all this speaking to the fact
that these point mutations and these
kinds of things are not causing cancer
they're the effects of cancer now what
they will do they'll abort development
so you can only go so far in development
so this is a very different kind of a
concept of what we what we've been uh
led to believe
so knowing that so you can't really in
my mind anyway you can't really attack a
disease if you if you don't have a clear
understanding of what you think that
disease is so if all cancers or most
cancers i should say are type of
mitochondrial metabolic these what kind
of therapies could we now envision
that might help us uh manage the disease
and calorie restriction of course is a
really powerful metabolic cancer
intervention involves a total dietary
restriction differs from starvation
maintains minerals adequate levels of
mineral nutrients enhances mitochondrial
bioenergenesis and end oxidative
phosphorylation and this is important
because john the other day mentioned you
know humans are not rats and vice versa
and and the key thing here is that we
know one of the major differences is
basal metabolic rate okay the basal
metabolic rate of human is about eight
fold lower than that of the mouse uh and
about seven fold lower than that of the
rat and this plays a huge role in how
and how these things uh develop
now when your calorie restrict everybody
knows glucose goes down insulin goes
down glucagon goes up hydro fatty acids
are mobilized at a fat stores go to the
liver they form water-soluble
beta-hydroxybutyrate acetoacetate and
acetone is an enzymatic bite this is an
evolutionary conserve process that we
would go through we've seen number of
papers here at the meeting
now when we look at this and say how are
we going to how can we use calorie
restriction
uh to manage the tumor i've just thrown
this diagram so if we look under here's
the bloodstream the capillary and here's
the tumor cell glucose comes in through
the transporters metabolized to pyruvate
under normal healthy conditions the
pyruvate would enter the mitochondria be
fully oxidized to give us energy through
oxidative phosphorylation but because
the mitochondria or either defective and
number structure function or some like
something like this in the cancer cells
pyruvate is reduced to lactate lactate
is excreted outside the cell creating an
environment of of of hypoxia and a wound
wound environment that leads to the
infiltration of all kinds of cells into
the into the system uh into the micro
environment and lactate can also go back
into the bloodstream and goes to the
liver be converted back into glucose
through the cory cycle and it can come
right back into the tumor in the form of
glucose so we lower glucose beta
hydroxybutyrate now becomes the
alternative fuel it goes into the
mitochondria of those cells that have
mitochondria but it goes through a
series of metabolic steps to get down to
acetyl-coa and we know from our work and
many others that there are some defects
in these pathways in the mitochondria of
tumor cells so you don't have you can't
metabolize this very well and even if
you can the mitochondria are often
uncoupled or few in number and it
becomes a very a very poor fuel uh for
tumor cells so what we essentially are
doing is we're marginalizing we're we're
for this fuel can be used by all the
normal cells but and the prime a prime
fuel glucose is being restricted so
metabolically marginalizing the tumor
cells and this will reduce their growth
and inflammation in the environment
now this is a diagram we often use just
to give you a highlight of of what a 40
calorie restriction can do to a mouse
with a with a
this is a uh astrocytoma
from us from a neural stem cell and and
you can see there's a marked reduction
and this ad libitum unrestricted feeding
this is a calorie restriction 40 for 14
days you can see a big effect we and
others have shown that calorie
restriction is anti-angiogenic
anti-inflammatory and pro-apotoxic
okay calorie restriction will lower
insulin like growth factor one it'll
down regulate uh veg
pi3 akt signaling pathway down to vegf
lowers all that stuff uh
anti-inflammatory we and others have
shown the calorie restriction lowers
inflammation by uh targeting nf capo
and kappa b
um
and those regulatory pathways and it's
also prohibited which is very very
important when you want to kill cancer
cells you want to kill cancer cells with
a non-inflammatory mechanism which is
apoptosis as opposed to necrosis a lot
of chemotherapies and things causing the
chronic death which leads to
inflammation we don't want that
now we have a new model of human
glioblastoma in the vm mouse and i just
briefly mentioned that these cells when
placed into these vm3 cells is a natural
uh a model of human glioblastoma you put
them into the brain and they they invade
right through the brain
it's impossible to surgically resect
something like this because the tumor
cells are well in advance they move from
one hemisphere of the brain to the other
hemisphere of the brain but when you put
them on calorie restriction you can see
it you can get a sharp smaller it's it's
much less diffuse and it's more
demarcated and you can see cells that
are reduced from moving from one side of
the brain to the other
now the problem with calorie restriction
it's wonderful and great to talk about
calorie restriction especially on a full
stomach everybody likes to talk about it
when you haven't eaten anything for a
week you'd be surprised what kind of an
attitude you have then
and you have cancer patients that are
already suffering from their disease
right they have anxiety they're all
upset about things and now you're going
to tell the guy he has to take a water
only fast for three or four weeks i mean
what is this doesn't work okay so with
the ketogenic diet we all know i mean
this is a this is a substitute for
calorie restriction it does it produces
many of the same biochemical uh
situation now this is a genetic
ketogenic diet
you know we all know it's low in carb
high in fat moderate and low moderate
protein high amount of energy per gram
of food and it's got a four to one fat
to protein carb ratio over the i want to
point out here
that the ketogenic diet is most
effective when consumed in restricted
amounts for managing cancer and i'll
present data to support that not that it
can't not that it can't work if you if
you if you eat a lot of it but it works
much much better when it's restricted
and because we we have shown in mice
that you can get dyslipidemia and you
can get insulin insensitivity which all
provoke the growth of the tumor so it's
best to restrict and prevent that i also
want to say uh this is an interesting
thing uh best ketogenic diets are from
natural ingredients um uh and i and we
don't talk much about the composition of
the ketogenic diet these ketogenic diets
are not all the same some work much
better than others and we're not really
sure why that's the case but just give
you a quick
overview here's a mouse tumor and a
human tumor grown in vivo and here's
ketogenic diet unrestricted has a
standard diet ketogenic diet
unrestricted for both the mouse and the
humor and you can see it's not reducing
tumor but it is when you restrict and
also when you look at the blood sugar
even though this is almost a zero carb
diet blood sugar stay high it's
dyslipidemia insulin insensitivity the
glucose goes down when restricted
ketones go high when you restrict higher
this is important because uh angela poff
and domin and i we we showed the ketones
can be toxic a new paper just came out
right recently showing that beta
hydroxybutyrate is a histone d acetylase
inhibitor and there's a lot of pharma
cancer drugs on the market that are
histone deacetylase inhibitors that
cause toxicity if beta-hydroxybutyrate
can kill tumor cells by that mechanism
why would we want to use toxic drugs
and then now this is an idealized
situation where we feel that when you
initiate the diet glucose is lowered
ketones are elevated and you try to get
this where ketones now become a major
fuel over glucose and this is the i'm
going to show you the real world when
you try to do this on a person and this
is always wonderful to to draw these
little diagrams but when you put into
practice you find out how difficult it
actually it actually becomes
um
so
what about patients well does it work in
patients the first patient well the
first paper was by lyndon dembling she
rescued two little girls that were uh
had uh progressive tumors that were
unresponsive to standard of care one one
child lived quite uh i think a couple of
years the other child of soul and they
were lost to follow-up so we never
really found out what i spoke to linda
directly about this uh we published the
second paper and of course you heard
from raphaela that
he showed you this already on julio's
mother
his father actually passed away from a
gbm three years earlier can you believe
something like this we never heard of
anything like this anyway he showed you
this uh multi-centric now
gbm uh now what right after surgery this
person went into a three-day water-only
fast segued into a very highly
restricted ketogenic diet and we were
able to um as as uh rafaeli and angela
have shown that um we have this um
reduction in glucose and elevation in in
ketones and then we have this now this
is called radiological resolution very
rarely do you see this with standard of
care not that it cannot happen but it's
extremely rare that you would have no
evidence of the tumor this is called
radiological resolution doesn't mean
cure right because what happened is this
person we had two more of these kinds of
images over a period of months every
everyone thought this tumor was managed
completely the person was very healthy
swimming in the mediterranean do all
kinds of things and then so off the diet
and 10 weeks later the tumor rages back
so there are tumor cells here that the
imaging can't pick up okay rather than
going back on the ketogenic diet the
family chose to go on avastin i
recommend it against avastin because i
had seen the data showing that if aston
selects for cells that can live in
hypoxic environments and they spread
throughout the whole brain and you can't
so what avastin does is it gives you a
radiological image that makes you look
good but there's no increase in overall
survival so i i think this is not a very
good drug to use unfortunately she used
the drug and did not survive not to say
that she would have survived that she
hadn't done this but we just don't know
now this is a a recent paper coming out
of johannes rieger's lab in germany and
what he concluded basically is the diet
is safe but but doesn't have any
therapeutic benefit but you know you say
well what happened well look at he
didn't he didn't uh the glucose is the
same the diet doesn't work i mean
i did the mouse study i showed it
doesn't work he did the same thing in
human it doesn't work so he but the
credit of the authors they both they all
mentioned that maybe we should have
restricted the diet it probably would
have worked i mean i think so
and i'll show you how now the the issue
here of course is you know what we're
dealing with here is a problem a major
problem and the problem in my view is
the standard of care itself so i we went
back and we said what is the standard of
care what's going on here um how do they
treat brain tumors
okay surgical restriction resection uh
radiation therapy and temozolomide
therapy and that's basically the
standard of care for gbm so we published
this little diagram in lancet oncology
showing that when you irradiate the
brain uh you kill neurons necrotically
the neurons release glutamate from their
from their stores and glutamine so what
happens is glutamate is an excitotoxic
neurotransmitter has to be regulated
very carefully in the brain the
glutamate glutamine cycle is under very
tight regulation to provide neural
function okay so you're releasing
glutamine in large amounts from the
radiation and the chemo and then this is
creating necrotic damage and the tumors
are sucking in this glutamine for
anaplerotic and growth
energy purposes
okay so you're giving a lot of fuels
that this tumor will use and creating a
very necrotic and
environment and then to reduce some of
the edema and inflammation high dose
dexamethasone is given which raises to
make hyperglycemia so essentially what
the standard of care is doing is
providing the two key fuels for the
fermentation of the cells these two
fuels and then also we now know from
more recent papers that the human
cytomegalovirus infects the tumor cells
of gbm and these viruses facilitate they
act like supercharges to use glucose and
glutamine in the tumor cells
so what we have essentially done is
created the perfect storm of adverse
effects for the survival and recurrence
and continued growth of of these of
these cells i mean let's this is the
survival curve from uh the the stoop
who divine who developed the standard of
care
which is currently used in all major
medical centers throughout the civilized
world there's very little variation in
the standard of care wherever you go
it's written in granite it's so written
in granite that it cannot be ever ever
changed
now look at this here's here's the red
is the is the the people who got
radiotherapy the blue i got combined
radiotherapy with temozolomide
not a single survivor from the
individuals that were radiated from this
now this was a i was at the meeting when
they had when they announced the
temozolomides an oral chemotherapy
alkylating agent and everybody was so
excited this was the single greatest
advance in brain tumor research in 60
years the introduction of oral
temizolamide into the patient population
so a paper just came out from johnson at
ucsf temozolomide increases driver
mutations by 10-fold in the tumor tissue
and i said to myself well wait a minute
now i don't think these driver mutations
aren't they so what do they drive they
drive progression okay why these people
living longer if they have all these
extra driver mutations
you say well how does that how does that
work
so i i went back and i we just published
a paper in cancer letters and we said
what are the adverse effects of
temozolomide it's it's fatigue diarrhea
nausea and vomiting
all right to a lot of patients do you
think these are all indirect calorie
restrictions
do you think this little thing is might
be calorie restriction that's
responsible because there certainly
can't be some genetic mechanism where
they have driver mutation increase
think about that for a minute now i
employed adrian scheck and what she's
trying to do she's trying to combine
ketogenic diets with radiation and i'm
very i'm hopeful that she's going to be
able to show that we can move this curve
a little bit further and this is what we
have to look forward to
so um i want to share with you now
another case report that's not yet
published but this is a person that we
uh uh myself and some oncologists have
been following uh an individual a woman
uh 56 years old at the time of gate
disturbance uh they were treated for all
kinds of she was treated for all kinds
of things
you know swimming lessons and all this
thinking it was something outside the
brain then finally there was a diagnosis
inoperable diffuse infiltrative brain
stem glioma
um and that was in 11 so she's had the
symptoms since 09. she initiated a
natural ketogenic diet also supplemented
metformin dca and curcumin she had to
stop dca after a while because of the
peripheral neuropathy issue that we
heard about earlier so she's basically
on on these two maybe now a little bit
of oxygen but we're not but still
pending then she went to these every
every major medical center five major
medical centers all recommending chemo
and radiation she refused everything so
this is a person who has had no surgery
no chemo no radiation just ketogenic
diet
that she's still going the tumor grows
but it grows very very slowly now here's
the reality of the situation blood sugar
goes down ketones going now she was very
hesitant at first and then here's what
the real picture looks like in a single
so when you talk about clinical trials
when all these people going to do all
this kind of stuff
there's an enormous amount of data that
you need to be involved with just from
one person so each one of these is the
mean of of 30 or more measurements using
a medicine's glucose meter ketone meter
and these are the averages of the month
so we have her over over two years now
uh monitoring she's over five years
after the the symptom onset now here
she's losing so much weight i mean this
is a weight loss diet we know this in
fact eric mentioned the other day
sometimes you have to get off the diet
just to get back so we're trying to
she's getting off the diet a little bit
you can see her numbers are getting
screwed up there but she's going back on
it again but you know she was at about
45 to 46
kilos and but she was doing very well
she was very healthy she drove me around
nice last spring i mean i was she was
quite good at driving through the french
you know villages and things so um but
but any event what the anxiety was there
was tremendous anxiety about oh my
sugar's high today my ketones are low
all this kind of stuff so what we did is
we developed the glucose ketone index a
simple tool to help manage cancer what
is the ratio of glucose and millimoto
ketone and millimole you get the
the the index therapeutic efficacy is
considered best with the index
approaching one point here now what my
student and i did we patented a formula
that can be added to the glucose ketone
meters in the form of a chip that you
can simply push the button and get the
index as soon as you measure glucose and
ketones you push the button you get a
single number this makes life
a lot easier and then we went back and
recalculated her data and you can see
that this is the period the tumor is
growing extremely slowly and here she's
getting off the diet a little bit you
can see going back on again but but you
get this you get this now this makes
patients a lot more comfortable they're
not freaking out all the time by having
all these weird values going up and down
so it's a much more uh uh stable way so
we went back and looked at um
the giulio's mother and her index was
37.5 at the beginning 1.4 during
radiological resolution we went back and
looked at our mice and you can see he
was at 15.2 and then the tumor was small
at 3.7 and then uh we we've now
correlated that the index the lower the
index it seems to be associated i think
it will work with epilepsy any of the
anything where you use a ketogenic diet
where glucose and ketones are essential
for the therapeutic management we're
going to get this kind of thing now
i don't think we're going to cure cancer
by using ketogenic diet now there's some
people that um think that oh we're going
to cure cancer using ketogenic diet i
think you know some people do really
well i don't think it's going to be the
be all to end-all it'll help now we're
going to use the press-pulse
paradigm this is a concept from ecology
that uh for mass extinction of organisms
you you take up a press and a pulse it's
a chronic situation combined with it
with an acute situation for the mass
extinction every cell in the tumor has
mutations uh every those mutations are
will be our allies because every as we
change the medical metabolic environment
of the whole organism some tumor cells
will survive under one condition some on
another condition but we should we think
no tumor cell will be able to survive on
all of the conditions that non-toxic
drugs and hyperbaric oxygen and this is
only the beginning there's so many other
things here's an example of press pulse
with 2d oxy glucose in diet so diet
works glucose had very little effect put
the two together you've got to press
pulse synergy same with what we heard
from raphael and dom with the angela
buff and dom d'agostino our metastatic
model they've the cells metastasized
throughout throughout and we can follow
them by bioluminescence imaging here's
hyperbaric oxygen by itself ketogenic
diet by itself with a mildly restricted
and together they get synergy press
pulse
and here's an example uh from our own
lab on publish using the ketogen
ketogenic diet 18 body weight reduction
and one of the 25 percent of cancer
patients die from metastasis from some
organ to the brain and we're able to
stop or we significantly reduce uh
metastasis from the from the breath we
have to cover the body because it's so
bright into the brain
so
preclinical and case report studies
indicate that the restricted diet can be
effective non-toxic metabolic therapy
and we think the effects can be uh
enhanced when we combine drugs with
oxygen in this press-pulse scenario now
i just wanted to uh briefly with the
couple of minutes i have left is um
it works really well on dogs okay so
this is a
large mast cell tumor on the nose here's
the nose of the dog now the woman the
woman uh read my you looked at my
youtube videos and read some of our
papers
and she said uh she went to the vet the
vet says uh surgery radiation chemo you
know what else is new uh the dog will
get very sick and may last only seven
months he said to her because this is a
very deadly kind of a tumor so uh she
does she goes out and gets the chicken
uh raw chicken with the bone still in it
medium chain triglyceride oil raw eggs
and cuts the calories by forty percent
the dog lost four uh five pounds
and uh this is just in a couple of
months you see where the tumor used to
be and now this is more recent the dog
is fine running around doing great so i
just from simply changing the diet you
know no no drugs nothing
so um i also would like to bring your
attention
to our new thematic review series that i
organized for the journal of lipid
research
um and this uh emerging evidence for the
therapeutic role of ketone bodies and
neurological and neurodegenerative
diseases and and much and we have met
several contributors here john rowe uh
adrian scheck uh susan massimo and uh uh
we had magumi prince and we have a lot
of discussion and and it brings together
a lot of the things uh that we've been
speaking about uh at these meetings and
and
outlining the mechanisms uh by which
this would uh be effective
so i'd just like to thank my colleagues
uh many of them from different
universities students and
physicians and and what have you uh and
i i'll uh thank you for your attention
and be happy to take any questions that
you might have